I’ve always dreamt of establishing a youth organization in my home province – an organization of, for, and by the youth of Aurora. So when Síkat-Baler was founded in August 2021, I was on cloud nine because I got the opportunity to meet a lot of youth in the province who have the heart for service. And I get to see their potential, mentor them, and pass on my passion for volunteerism to them.
And when I look back, I couldn’t imagine we would have come this far. Never in my wildest dreams did I think that SIKAT BALER would grow into 70 strong active members with over 30 pending applications. Never did I imagine that we would have concluded our 4th cycle of Abot Ko Ang Libro (ABKL) last February 26 in Brgy. Reserva. Never did I think we would reach almost 500 learners in a span of 8 months amid the pandemic.
And cycle in cycle out for our primary project ABKL, we experienced so many firsts. And every time a new cycle would start, we made sure to build on our previous ones.
The cycle in Ilaya was the pioneer cycle so it gave us all our firsts. It was our first time to try out the five Saturday ABKL in a community setting, to have parents sign a photo/video release form, and to introduce a classroom routine (opening and closing prayer and songs, sing & dance, rules, attention-getters), among others. For some of our volunteers, it was also their first time to tell a story to kids.
For our cycle in Calabuanan, it was the start of SÍKAT members stepping up and leading the ABKL implementation. We called them co-leads who would coordinate with our SK partners, prepare the materials and taskings, and mobilize their fellow volunteers every Saturday. It was also the first time that we introduced the ABKL kit – a kit that contained basic school supplies and a storybook and that served as a token of our co-learners for completing the 5-Saturday ABKL.
Moreover, our Brgy.5 cycle gave us the first of creating our own storybook lesson plans to have more structured storytelling sessions. The lesson plans gave our volunteers more confidence to tell a story as they had a guide to follow. It allowed our co-learners to understand even better the books that we read to them.
For our cycle in Reserva, we had our first student with special needs in the name of Danreb. And we’re glad to have a SPED Major in the house to guide us in dealing with him.
And when we launched Abot Ko Ang Libro last year, our vision for the project was clear. It was only to provide an easy access to books and inculcate a love of reading among kids in the middle of a pandemic. But cycle in cycle out, we saw the project evolved right before our eyes.
From what was once a reading corner, ABKL became a full alternative classroom learning experience during a time that our co-learners yearned for one. It did not just introduce our co-learners to the magical world of reading but it actually went above and beyond by providing a well-rounded development for each of them. They acquired knowledge from the storybooks in our mini-library cart and from our story telling sessions. They got exposed to their same aged compatriots – allowing them to practice empathy, participation, and friendship. They also got to channel their energy into more sociable avenues through our opening and closing songs, breakout sessions, and play time during breaks.
And as schools gradually reopen its doors, we are excited for our co-learners to return to their classrooms or set foot for the first time in a classroom. We look forward to them honing their skills, developing their identities, and widening their horizons. We hope to see them flourish and succeed in school.
But on the other hand, we, in SÍKAT BALER, will surely miss singing the ‘O Kay Sarap Magbasa’ and ‘Paalam Na’ songs with them. We will miss waking up early on a Saturday to meet and tell a story to them. We will miss hearing the anecdotes of parents every cycle:
“Naku sir. Sila na nga po ang gumigising sa amin tuwing Sabado kasi excited mag-ABKL.”
“Si Nicolas sir binibilang ang araw bago mag Sabado kasi excited na bumalik kayo at mag ABKL.”
Indeed, it was a good 8-month run of Abot Ko Ang Libro. But know that this is not goodbye. This is just see you later. 🤔🤔
SÍKAT-BALER, whose name is a tribute to the rise (pagsíkat) of a new face of youth volunteerism in a place where the sun rises, will always come up with new initiatives that are geared towards brighter, better, and bolder communities. 😊
#AbotKoAngLibro